.. _hypothesis-plugins:

hypothesis plugin
=================

We provide several extra features for Hypothesis users.
And encourage to use it together with ``returns``.


Installation
------------

You will need to install ``hypothesis`` separately.
It is not bundled with ``returns``.

We also require ``anyio`` package for this plugin to work with async laws.


hypothesis entrypoint
---------------------

We support a ``hypothesis`` entrypoint
that is executed on ``hypothesis`` import.

There we are registering all our containers as strategies.
So, you don't have to. Example:

.. code:: python

  from returns.result import Result
  from hypothesis import strategies as st

  assert st.from_type(Result).example()

This means you can use ``Result``, ``Maybe``, etc. in your own property tests,
and ``hypothesis`` will generate values for them as expected.


check_all_laws
--------------

We also provide a very powerful mechanism of checking defined container laws.
It works in a combination with "Laws as Values" feature we provide in the core.

.. code:: python

  from returns.contrib.hypothesis.laws import check_all_laws
  from your.module import YourCustomContainer

  check_all_laws(YourCustomContainer)

This one line of code will generate ~100 tests for all defined laws
in both ``YourCustomContainer`` and all its super types,
including our internal ones and user-defined ones.

We also provide a way to configure
the checking process with ``settings_kwargs``:

.. code:: python

  check_all_laws(YourCustomContainer, settings_kwargs={'max_examples': 500})

This will increase the number of generated test to 500.
We support all kwargs from ``@settings``, see
`@settings docs <https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/settings.html>`_.

You can also change how ``hypothesis`` creates instances of your container.
By default, we use ``.from_value``, ``.from_optional``, and ``.from_failure``
if we are able to find them.

But, you can also pass types without these methods,
but with ``__init__`` defined:

.. code:: python

  from typing import Callable, TypeVar, final
  from returns.interfaces.mappable import Mappable1
  from returns.primitives.container import BaseContainer
  from returns.primitives.hkt import SupportsKind1

  _ValueType = TypeVar('_ValueType')
  _NewValueType = TypeVar('_NewValueType')

  @final
  class Number(
      BaseContainer,
      SupportsKind1['Number', _ValueType],
      Mappable1[_ValueType],
  ):
      def __init__(self, inner_value: _ValueType) -> None:
          super().__init__(inner_value)

      def map(
          self,
          function: Callable[[_ValueType], _NewValueType],
      ) -> 'Number[_NewValueType]':
          return Number(function(self._inner_value))

  # We want to allow ``__init__`` method to be used:
  check_all_laws(Number, use_init=True)

As you see, we don't support any ``from`` methods here.
But, ``__init__`` would be used to generate values thanks to ``use_init=True``.

By default, we don't allow to use ``__init__``,
because there are different complex types
like ``Future``, ``ReaderFutureResult``, etc
that have complex ``__init__`` signatures.
And we don't want to mess with them.

Warning::
  Checking laws is not compatible with ``pytest-xdist``,
  because we use a lot of global mutable state there.
  Please, use ``returns_lawful`` marker
  to exclude them from ``pytest-xdist`` execution plan.


Registering Custom Strategies when Checking Laws
------------------------------------------------

``hypothesis`` works by looking up strategies for the provided type
annotations. Given that the types provided by ``returns`` are very complicated
and not really native to Python, they may not be understood by ``hypothesis``,
and you may get runtime exceptions such as ``ResolutionFailed``.

In such cases, you may want to register custom strategies for types for which
``hypothesis`` does not find any strategies.

The main use case is registering a custom strategy to generate your container
when running its laws:

.. code:: python


  from hypothesis import strategies as st

  check_all_laws(Number, container_strategy=st.builds(Number, st.integers()))

You can also register strategies for other types:

.. code:: python


  from hypothesis import strategies as st

  check_all_laws(
      Number,
      container_strategy=st.builds(Number, st.integers()),
      type_strategies={Foo: st.builds(Foo, st.text())},
  )

These custom strategies will be used only when running the tests generated by
the ``check_all_laws`` call above. They will have no effect on any other
property tests that involve the same types. You cannot use this argument
together with ``use_init``.


Registering Custom Strategies outside Law Tests
-----------------------------------------------

We provide a utility function
to create ``hypothesis`` strategy from any container:
``strategy_from_container``.

You can use it to register your own containers.

.. code:: python

  from hypothesis import strategies as st
  from returns.contrib.hypothesis.containers import strategy_from_container

  st.register_type_strategy(
      YourContainerClass,
      strategy_from_container(YourContainerClass),
  )

You can also pass ``use_init`` keyword argument
if you wish to use ``__init__`` method to instantiate your containers.
Turned off by default.
Example:

.. code:: python

  st.register_type_strategy(
      YourContainerClass,
      strategy_from_container(YourContainerClass, use_init=True),
  )

Or you can write your own ``hypothesis`` strategy. It is also fine.

Warning::
  Avoid directly registering your container's strategy with ``hypothesis``
  using ``st.register_type_strategy``. Because of the way we emulate
  higher-kinded types, ``hypothesis`` may mistakenly use the strategy for
  other incompatible containers and cause spurious test failures. We specify
  how to do it just in case you need it and you know what you're doing.


Further reading
---------------

- `Projects Extending hypothesis <https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/strategies.html>`_


API Reference
-------------

Types we have already registered for you
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. automodule:: returns.contrib.hypothesis._entrypoint
   :members:

DSL to register custom containers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. automodule:: returns.contrib.hypothesis.containers
   :members:

DSL to define laws
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoclasstree:: returns.primitives.laws
   :strict:

.. automodule:: returns.primitives.laws
   :members:

Plugin internals
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. automodule:: returns.contrib.hypothesis.laws
   :members:
